Once I got over the fact that my Latin teacher was a horse, we had a nice tour,
though I was careful not to walk behind him. I’d done pooper-scooper patrol in
the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade a few times, and, I’m sorry, I did not trust
Chiron’s back end the way I trusted his front.
We passed the volleyball pit. Several of the campers nudged each other. One
pointed to the Minotaur horn I was carrying. Another said, ‘That’s him.’
Most of the campers were older than me. Their satyr friends were bigger than
Grover, all of them trotting around in orange CAMP HALF-BLOOD T-shirts,
with nothing else to cover their bare shaggy hindquarters. I wasn’t normally shy,
but the way they stared at me made me uncomfortable. I felt like they were
expecting me to do a cartwheel or something.
I looked back at the farmhouse. It was a lot bigger than I’d realized – four
storeys tall, sky blue with white trim, like an upmarket seaside resort. I was
checking out the brass eagle weather vane on top when something caught my
eye, a shadow in the uppermost window of the attic gable. Something had
moved the curtain, just for a second, and I got the distinct impression I was
being watched.
‘What’s up there?’ I asked Chiron.
He looked where I was pointing, and his smile faded. ‘Just the attic.’
‘Somebody lives there?’
‘No,’ he said with finality. ‘Not a single living thing.’
I got the feeling he was being truthful. But I was also sure something had
moved that curtain.
‘Come along, Percy,’ Chiron said, his lighthearted tone now a little forced.
‘Lots to see.’
We walked through the strawberry fields, where campers were picking bushels
of berries while a satyr played a tune on a reed pipe.
Chiron told me the camp grew a nice crop for export to New York restaurants
and Mount Olympus. ‘It pays our expenses,’ he explained. ‘And the strawberries
take almost no effort.’
He said Mr D had this effect on fruit-bearing plants: they just went crazy
when he was around. It worked best with wine grapes, but Mr D was restricted
from growing those, so they grew strawberries instead.
I watched the satyr playing his pipe. His music was causing lines of bugs to
leave the strawberry patch in every direction, like refugees fleeing a fire. I
wondered if Grover could work that kind of magic with music. I wondered if he
was still inside the farmhouse, being lectured by Mr D.
‘Grover won’t get in too much trouble, will he?’ I asked Chiron. ‘I mean… he
was a good protector. Really.’
Chiron sighed. He shed his tweed jacket and draped it over his horse’s back
like a saddle. ‘Grover has big dreams, Percy. Perhaps bigger than are reasonable.
To reach his goal, he must first demonstrate great courage by succeeding as a
keeper, finding a new camper and bringing him safely to Half-Blood Hill.’
‘But he did that!’
‘I might agree with you,’ Chiron said. ‘But it is not my place to judge.
Dionysus and the Council of Cloven Elders must decide. I’m afraid they might
not see this assignment as a success. After all, Grover lost you in New York.
Then there’s the unfortunate… ah… fate of your mother. And the fact that
Grover was unconscious when you dragged him over the property line. The
council might question whether this shows any courage on Grover’s part.’
I wanted to protest. None of what had happened was Grover’s fault. I also felt
really, really guilty. If I hadn’t given Grover the slip at the bus station, he might
not have got in trouble.
‘He’ll get a second chance, won’t he?’
Chiron winced. ‘I’m afraid that was Grover’s second chance, Percy. The
council was not anxious to give him another, either, after what happened the first
time, five years ago. Olympus knows, I advised him to wait longer before trying
again. He’s still so small for his age…’
‘How old is he?’
‘Oh, twenty-eight.’
‘What! And he’s in sixth grade?’
‘Satyrs mature half as fast as humans, Percy. Grover has been the equivalent
of a middle school student for the past six years.’
‘That’s horrible.’
‘Quite,’ Chiron agreed. ‘At any rate, Grover is a late bloomer, even by satyr
standards, and not yet very accomplished at woodland magic. Alas, he was
anxious to pursue his dream. Perhaps now he will find some other career…’
‘That’s not fair,’ I said. ‘What happened the first time? Was it really so bad?’
Chiron looked away quickly. ‘Let’s move along, shall we?’
But I wasn’t quite ready to let the subject drop. Something had occurred to me
when Chiron talked about my mother’s fate, as if he were intentionally avoiding
the word death. The beginnings of an idea – a tiny, hopeful fire – started forming
in my mind.
‘Chiron,’ I said. ‘If the gods and Olympus and all that are real…’
‘Yes, child?’
‘Does that mean the Underworld is real, too?’
Chiron’s expression darkened.
‘Yes, child.’ He paused, as if choosing his words carefully. ‘There is a place
where spirits go after death. But for now… until we know more… I would urge
you to put that out of your mind.’
‘What do you mean, “until we know more”?’
‘Come, Percy. Let’s see the woods.’
As we got closer, I realized how huge the forest was. It took up at least a quarter
of the valley, with trees so tall and thick, you could imagine nobody had been in
there since the Native Americans.
Chiron said, ‘The woods are stocked, if you care to try your luck, but go
armed.’
‘Stocked with what?’ I asked. ‘Armed with what?’
‘You’ll see. Capture the flag is Friday night. Do you have your own sword and
shield?’
‘My own –’
‘No,’ Chiron said. ‘I don’t suppose you do. I think a size five will do. I’ll visit
the armoury later.’
I wanted to ask what kind of summer camp had an armoury, but there was too
much else to think about, so the tour continued. We saw the archery range, the
canoeing lake, the stables (which Chiron didn’t seem to like very much), the
javelin range, the sing-along amphitheatre, and the arena where Chiron said they
held sword and spear fights.
‘Sword and spear fights?’ I asked.
‘Cabin challenges and all that,’ he explained. ‘Not lethal. Usually. Oh, yes,
and there’s the mess hall.’
Chiron pointed to an outdoor pavilion framed in white Grecian columns on a
hill overlooking the sea. There were a dozen stone picnic tables. No roof. No
walls.
‘What do you do when it rains?’ I asked.
Chiron looked at me as if I’d gone a little weird. ‘We still have to eat, don’t
we?’ I decided to drop the subject.
Finally, he showed me the cabins. There were twelve of them, nestled in the
woods by the lake. They were arranged in a U, with two at the base and five in a
row on either side. And they were without doubt the most bizarre collection of
buildings I’d ever seen.
Except for the fact that each had a large brass number above the door (odds on
the left side, evens on the right), they looked absolutely nothing alike. Number
nine had smokestacks like a tiny factory. Number four had tomato vines on the
walls and a roof made out of real grass. Seven seemed to be made of solid gold,
which gleamed so much in the sunlight it was almost impossible to look at. They
all faced a commons area about the size of a soccer field, dotted with Greek
statues, fountains, flower beds, and a couple of basketball hoops (which were
more my speed).
In the centre of the field was a huge stone-lined firepit. Even though it was a
warm afternoon, the hearth smouldered. A girl about nine years old was tending
the flames, poking the coals with a stick.
The pair of cabins at the head of the field, numbers one and two, looked like
his-and-hers mausoleums, big white marble boxes with heavy columns in front.
Cabin one was the biggest and bulkiest of the twelve. Its polished bronze doors
shimmered like a holograph, so that from different angles lightning bolts seemed
to streak across them. Cabin two was more graceful somehow, with slimmer
columns garlanded with pomegranates and flowers. The walls were carved with
images of peacocks.
‘Zeus and Hera?’ I guessed.
‘Correct,’ Chiron said.
‘Their cabins look empty.’
‘Several of the cabins are. That’s true. No one ever stays in one or two.’
Okay. So each cabin had a different god, like a mascot. Twelve cabins for the
twelve Olympians. But why would some be empty?
I stopped in front of the first cabin on the left, cabin three.
It wasn’t high and mighty like cabin one, but long and low and solid. The
outer walls were of rough grey stone studded with pieces of seashell and coral,
as if the slabs had been hewn straight from the bottom of the ocean floor. I
peeked inside the open doorway and Chiron said, ‘Oh, I wouldn’t do that!’
Before he could pull me back, I caught the salty scent of the interior, like the
wind on the shore at Montauk. The interior walls glowed like abalone. There
were six empty bunk beds with silk sheets turned down. But there was no sign
anyone had ever slept there. The place felt so sad and lonely, I was glad when
Chiron put his hand on my shoulder and said, ‘Come along, Percy.’
Most of the other cabins were crowded with campers.
Number five was bright red – a real nasty paint job, as if the colour had been
splashed on with buckets and fists. The roof was lined with barbed wire. A
stuffed wild boar’s head hung over the doorway, and its eyes seemed to follow
me. Inside I could see a bunch of mean-looking kids, both girls and boys, arm
wrestling and arguing with each other while rock music blared. The loudest was
a girl maybe thirteen or fourteen. She wore a size XXXL Camp Half-Blood Tshirt under a camouflage jacket. She zeroed in on me and gave me an evil sneer.
She reminded me of Nancy Bobofit, though the camper girl was much bigger
and tougher looking, and her hair was long and stringy, and brown instead of
red.
I kept walking, trying to stay clear of Chiron’s hooves. ‘We haven’t seen any
other centaurs,’ I observed.
‘No,’ said Chiron sadly. ‘My kinsmen are a wild and barbaric folk, I’m afraid.
You might encounter them in the wilderness, or at major sporting events. But
you won’t see any here.’
‘You said your name was Chiron. Are you really…’
He smiled down at me. ‘The Chiron from the stories? Trainer of Hercules and
all that? Yes, Percy, I am.’
‘But, shouldn’t you be dead?’
Chiron paused, as if the question intrigued him. ‘I honestly don’t know about
should be. The truth is, I can’t be dead. You see, aeons ago the gods granted my
wish. I could continue the work I loved. I could be a teacher of heroes as long as
humanity needed me. I gained much from that wish… and I gave up much. But
I’m still here, so I can only assume I’m still needed.’
I thought about being a teacher for three thousand years. It wouldn’t have
made my Top Ten Things to Wish For list.
‘Doesn’t it ever get boring?’
‘No, no,’ he said. ‘Horribly depressing, at times, but never boring.’
‘Why depressing?’
Chiron seemed to turn hard of hearing again.
‘Oh, look,’ he said. ‘Annabeth is waiting for us.’
* * *
The blonde girl I’d met at the Big House was reading a book in front of the last
cabin on the left, number eleven.
When we reached her, she looked me over critically, like she was still thinking
about how much I drooled.
I tried to see what she was reading, but I couldn’t make out the title. I thought
my dyslexia was acting up. Then I realized the title wasn’t even English. The
letters looked Greek to me. I mean, literally Greek. There were pictures of
temples and statues and different kinds of columns, like those in an architecture
book.
‘Annabeth,’ Chiron said, ‘I have masters’ archery class at noon. Would you
take Percy from here?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Cabin eleven,’ Chiron told me, gesturing towards the doorway. ‘Make
yourself at home.’
Out of all the cabins, eleven looked the most like a regular old summer camp
cabin, with the emphasis on old. The threshold was worn down, the brown paint
peeling. Over the doorway was one of those doctor’s symbols, a winged pole
with two snakes wrapped around it. What did they call it…? A caduceus.
Inside, it was packed with people, both boys and girls, way more than the
number of bunk beds. Sleeping bags were spread all over on the floor. It looked
like a gym where the Red Cross had set up an evacuation centre.
Chiron didn’t go in. The door was too low for him. But when the campers saw
him they all stood and bowed respectfully.
‘Well, then,’ Chiron said. ‘Good luck, Percy. I‘ll see you at dinner.’
He galloped away towards the archery range.
I stood in the doorway, looking at the kids. They weren’t bowing any more.
They were staring at me, sizing me up. I knew this routine. I’d gone through it at
enough schools.
‘Well?’ Annabeth prompted. ‘Go on.’
So naturally I tripped coming in the door and made a total fool of myself.
There were some snickers from the campers, but none of them said anything.
Annabeth announced, ‘Percy Jackson, meet cabin eleven.’
‘Regular or undetermined?’somebody asked.
I didn’t know what to say, but Annabeth said, ‘Undetermined.’
Everybody groaned.
A guy who was a little older than the rest came forward. ‘Now, now, campers.
That’s what we’re here for. Welcome, Percy. You can have that spot on the floor,
right over there.’
The guy was about nineteen, and he looked pretty cool. He was tall and
muscular, with short-cropped sandy hair and a friendly smile. He wore an orange
tank top, cutoffs, sandals and a leather necklace with five different-coloured clay
beads. The only thing unsettling about his appearance was a thick white scar that
ran from just beneath his right eye to his jaw, like an old knife slash.
‘This is Luke,’ Annabeth said, and her voice sounded different somehow. I
glanced over and could’ve sworn she was blushing. She saw me looking, and her
expression hardened again. ‘He’s your counsellor for now.’
‘For now?’ I asked.
‘You’re undetermined,’ Luke explained patiently. ‘They don’t know what
cabin to put you in, so you’re here. Cabin eleven takes all newcomers, all
visitors. Naturally, we would. Hermes, our patron, is the god of travellers.’
I looked at the tiny section of floor they’d given me. I had nothing to put there
to mark it as my own, no luggage, no clothes, no sleeping bag. Just the
Minotaur’s horn. I thought about setting that down, but then I remembered that
Hermes was also the god of thieves.
I looked around at the campers’ faces, some sullen and suspicious, some
grinning stupidly, some eyeing me as if they were waiting for a chance to pick
my pockets.
‘How long will I be here?’ I asked.
‘Good question,’ Luke said. ‘Until you’re determined.’
‘How long will that take?’
The campers all laughed.
‘Come on,’ Annabeth told me. ‘I’ll show you the volleyball court.’
‘I’ve already seen it.’
‘Come on.’
She grabbed my wrist and dragged me outside. I could hear the kids of cabin
eleven laughing behind me.
When we were a few metres away, Annabeth said, ‘Jackson, you have to do
better than that.’
‘What?’
She rolled her eyes and mumbled under her breath, ‘I can’t believe I thought
you were the one.’
‘What’s your problem?’ I was getting angry now. ‘All I know is, I kill some
bull guy –’
‘Don’t talk like that!’ Annabeth told me. ‘You know how many kids at this
camp wish they’d had your chance?’
‘To get killed?’
‘To fight the Minotaur! What do you think we train for?’
I shook my head. ‘Look, if the thing I fought really was the Minotaur, the
same one in the stories…’
‘Yes.’
‘Then there’s only one.’
‘Yes.’
‘And he died, like, a gajillion years ago, right? Theseus killed him in the
labyrinth. So…’
‘Monsters don’t die, Percy. They can be killed. But they don’t die.’
‘Oh, thanks. That clears it up.’
‘They don’t have souls, like you and me. You can dispel them for a while,
maybe even for a whole lifetime if you’re lucky. But they are primal forces.
Chiron calls them archetypes. Eventually, they re-form.’
I thought about Mrs Dodds. ‘You mean if I killed one, accidentally, with a
sword –’
‘The Fu… I mean, your maths teacher. That’s right. She’s still out there. You
just made her very, very mad.’
‘How did you know about Mrs Dodds?’
‘You talk in your sleep.’
‘You almost called her something. A Fury? They’re Hades’ torturers, right?’
Annabeth glanced nervously at the ground, as if she expected it to open up
and swallow her. ‘You shouldn’t call them by name, even here. We call them the
Kindly Ones, if we have to speak of them at all.’
‘Look, is there anything we can say without it thundering?’ I sounded whiny,
even to myself, but right then I didn’t care. ‘Why do I have to stay in cabin
eleven, anyway? Why is everybody so crowded together? There are plenty of
empty bunks right over there.’
I pointed to the first few cabins, and Annabeth turned pale. ‘You don’t just
choose a cabin, Percy. It depends on who your parents are. Or… your parent.’
She stared at me, waiting for me to get it.
‘My mom is Sally Jackson,’ I said. ‘She works at the candy store in Grand
Central Station. At least, she used to.’
I’m sorry about your mom, Percy. But that’s not what I mean. I’m talking
about your other parent. Your dad.’
‘He’s dead. I never knew him.’
Annabeth sighed. Clearly, she’d had this conversation before with other kids.
‘Your father’s not dead, Percy.’
‘How can you say that? You know him?’
‘No, of course not.’
‘Then how can you say –’
‘Because I know you. You wouldn’t be here if you weren’t one of us.’
‘You don’t know anything about me.’
‘No?’ She raised an eyebrow. ‘I bet you moved around from school to school.
I bet you were kicked out of a lot of them.’
‘How –’
‘Diagnosed with dyslexia. Probably ADHD, too.’
I tried to swallow my embarrassment. ‘What does that have to do with
anything?’
‘Taken together, it’s almost a sure sign. The letters float off the page when you
read, right? That’s because your mind is hardwired for ancient Greek. And the
ADHD – you’re impulsive, can’t sit still in the classroom. That’s your battlefield
reflexes. In a real fight, they’d keep you alive. As for the attention problems,
that’s because you see too much, Percy, not too little. Your senses are better than
a regular mortal’s. Of course the teachers want you medicated. Most of them are
monsters. They don’t want you seeing them for what they are.’
‘You sound like… you went through the same thing?’
‘Most of the kids here did. If you weren’t like us, you couldn’t have survived
the Minotaur, much less the ambrosia and nectar.’
‘Ambrosia and nectar.’
‘The food and drink we were giving you to make you better. That stuff
would’ve killed a normal kid. It would’ve turned your blood to fire and your
bones to sand and you’d be dead. Face it. You’re a half-blood.’
A half-blood.
I was reeling with so many questions I didn’t know where to start.
Then a husky voice yelled, ‘Well! A newbie!’
I looked over. The big girl from the ugly red cabin was sauntering towards us.
She had three other girls behind her, all big and ugly and mean-looking like her,
all wearing camo jackets.
‘Clarisse,’ Annabeth sighed. ‘Why don’t you go polish your spear or
something?’
‘Sure, Miss Princess,’ the big girl said. ‘So I can run you through with it
Friday night.’
‘Errete es korakas,’ Annabeth said, which I somehow understood was Greek
for “Go to the crows”, though I had a feeling it was a worse curse than it
sounded. ‘You don’t stand a chance.’
We’ll pulverize you,’ Clarisse said, but her eye twitched. Perhaps she wasn’t
sure she could follow through on the threat. She turned towards me. ‘Who’s this
little runt?’
‘Percy Jackson,’ Annabeth said, ‘meet Clarisse, Daughter of Ares.’
I blinked. ‘Like… the war god?’
Clarisse sneered. ‘You got a problem with that?’
‘No,’ I said, recovering my wits. ‘It explains the bad smell.’
Clarisse growled. ‘We got an initiation ceremony for newbies, Prissy.’
‘Percy.’
‘Whatever. Come on, I’ll show you.’
‘Clarisse –’ Annabeth tried to say.
‘Stay out of it, wise girl.’
Annabeth looked pained, but she did stay out of it, and I didn’t really want her
help. I was the new kid. I had to earn my own rep.
I handed Annabeth my Minotaur horn and got ready to fight, but before I
knew it, Clarisse had me by the neck and was dragging me towards a cinderblock building that I knew immediately was the bathroom.
I was kicking and punching. I’d been in plenty of fights before, but this big
girl Clarisse had hands like iron. She dragged me into the girls’ bathroom. There
was a line of toilets on one side and a line of shower stalls down the other. It
smelled just like any public bathroom, and I was thinking – as much as I could
think with Clarisse ripping my hair out – that if this place belonged to the gods,
they should’ve been able to afford classier toilets.
Clarisse’s friends were all laughing, and I was trying to find the strength I’d
used to fight the Minotaur, but it just wasn’t there.
‘Like he’s “Big Three” material,’ Clarisse said as she pushed me towards one
of the toilets. ‘Yeah, right. Minotaur probably fell over laughing, he was so
stupid-looking.’
Her friends snickered.
Annabeth stood in the corner, watching through her fingers.
Clarisse bent me over on my knees and started pushing my head towards the
toilet bowl. It reeked like rusted pipes and, well, like what goes into toilets. I
strained to keep my head up. I was looking at the scummy water thinking, I will
not go into that. I won’t.
Then something happened. I felt a tug in the pit of my stomach. I heard the
plumbing rumble, the pipes shudder. Clarisse’s grip on my hair loosened. Water
shot out of the toilet, making an arc straight over my head, and the next thing I
knew, I was sprawled on the bathroom tiles with Clarisse screaming behind me.
I turned just as water blasted out of the toilet again, hitting Clarisse straight in
the face so hard it pushed her down onto her butt. The water stayed on her like
the spray from a fire hose, pushing her backwards into a shower stall.
She struggled, gasping, and her friends started coming towards her. But then
the other toilets exploded, too, and six more streams of toilet water blasted them
back. The showers acted up, too, and together all the fixtures sprayed the
camouflage girls right out of the bathroom, spinning them around like pieces of
garbage being washed away.
As soon as they were out the door, I felt the tug in my gut lessen, and the
water shut off as quickly as it had started.
The entire bathroom was flooded. Annabeth hadn’t been spared. She was
dripping wet, but she hadn’t been pushed out the door. She was standing in
exactly the same place, staring at me in shock.
I looked down and realized I was sitting in the only dry spot in the whole
room. There was a circle of dry floor around me. I didn’t have one drop of water
on my clothes. Nothing.
I stood up, my legs shaky.
Annabeth said, ‘How did you…’
‘I don’t know.’
We walked to the door. Outside, Clarisse and her friends were sprawled in the
mud, and a bunch of other campers had gathered around to gawk. Clarisse’s hair
was flattened across her face. Her camouflage jacket was sopping and she
smelled like sewage. She gave me a look of absolute hatred. ‘You are dead, new
boy. You are totally dead.’
I probably should have let it go, but I said, ‘You want to gargle with toilet
water again, Clarisse? Close your mouth.’
Her friends had to hold her back. They dragged her towards cabin five, while
the other campers made way to avoid her flailing feet.
Annabeth stared at me. I couldn’t tell whether she was just grossed out or
angry at me for dousing her.
‘What?’ I demanded. ‘What are you thinking?’
‘I’m thinking,’she said, ‘that I want you on my team for capture the flag.’
It didn’t take me long to pack. I decided to leave the Minotaur horn in my cabin,
which left me only an extra change of clothes and a toothbrush to stuff in a
backpack Grover had found for me.
The camp store loaned me one hundred dollars in mortal money and twenty
golden drachmas. These coins were as big as Girl Scout cookies and had images
of various Greek gods stamped on one side and the Empire State Building on the
other. The ancient mortal drachmas had been silver, Chiron told us, but
Olympians never used less than pure gold. Chiron said the coins might come in
handy for nonmortal transactions – whatever that meant. He gave Annabeth and
me each a flask of nectar and an airtight bag full of ambrosia squares, to be used
only in emergencies, if we were seriously hurt. It was god food, Chiron
reminded us. It would cure us of almost any injury, but it was lethal to mortals.
Too much of it would make a half-blood very, very feverish. An overdose would
burn us up, literally.
Annabeth was bringing her magic Yankees cap, which she told me had been a
twelfth-birthday present from her mom. She carried a book on famous classical
architecture, written in Ancient Greek, to read when she got bored, and a long
bronze knife, hidden in her shirt sleeve. I was sure the knife would get us busted
the first time we went through a metal detector.
Grover wore his fake feet and his trousers to pass as human. He wore a green
rasta-style cap, because when it rained his curly hair flattened and you could just
see the tips of his horns. His bright orange backpack was full of scrap metal and
apples to snack on. In his pocket was a set of reed pipes his daddy goat had
carved for him, even though he only knew two songs: Mozart’s Piano Concerto
no. 12 and Hilary Duff’s ‘So Yesterday’, both of which sounded pretty bad on
reed pipes.
We waved goodbye to the other campers, took one last look at the strawberry
fields, the ocean and the Big House, then hiked up Half-Blood Hill to the tall
pine tree that used to be Thalia, daughter of Zeus.
Chiron was waiting for us in his wheelchair. Next to him stood the surfer dude
I’d seen when I was recovering in the sick room. According to Grover, the guy
was the camp’s head of security. He supposedly had eyes all over his body so he
could never be surprised. Today, though, he was wearing a chauffeur’s uniform,
so I could only see extra peepers on his hands, face and neck.
‘This is Argus,’ Chiron told me. ‘He will drive you into the city, and, er, well,
keep an eye on things.’
I heard footsteps behind us.
Luke came running up the hill, carrying a pair of basketball shoes.
‘Hey!’ he panted. ‘Glad I caught you.’
Annabeth blushed, the way she always did when Luke was around.
‘Just wanted to say good luck,’ Luke told me. ‘And I thought… um, maybe
you could use these.’
He handed me the sneakers, which looked pretty normal. They even smelled
kind of normal.
Luke said, ‘Maia!’
White bird’s wings sprouted out of the heels, startling me so much, I dropped
them. The shoes flapped around on the ground until the wings folded up and
disappeared.
‘Awesome!’ Grover said.
Luke smiled. ‘Those served me well when I was on my quest. Gift from Dad.
Of course, I don’t use them much these days…’ His expression turned sad.
I didn’t know what to say. It was cool enough that Luke had come to say
goodbye. I’d been afraid he might resent me for getting so much attention the
last few days. But here he was giving me a magic gift… It made me blush
almost as much as Annabeth.
‘Hey, man,’ I said. ‘Thanks.’
‘Listen, Percy…’ Luke looked uncomfortable. ‘A lot of hopes are riding on
you. So just… kill some monsters for me, okay?’
We shook hands. Luke patted Grover’s head between his horns, then gave a
goodbye hug to Annabeth, who looked like she might pass out.
After Luke was gone, I told her, ‘You’re hyperventilating.’
‘Am not.’
‘You let him capture the flag instead of you, didn’t you?’
‘Oh… why do I want to go anywhere with you, Percy?’
She stomped down the other side of the hill, where a white SUV waited on the
shoulder of the road. Argus followed, jingling his car keys.
I picked up the flying shoes and had a sudden bad feeling. I looked at Chiron.
‘I won’t be able to use these, will I?’
He shook his head. ‘Luke meant well, Percy. But taking to the air… that
would not be wise for you.’
I nodded, disappointed, but then I got an idea. ‘Hey, Grover. You want a
magic item?’
His eyes lit up. ‘Me?’
Pretty soon we’d laced the sneakers over his fake feet, and the world’s first
flying goat boy was ready for launch.
‘Maia!’ he shouted.
He got off the ground okay, but then fell over sideways so his backpack
dragged through the grass. The winged shoes kept bucking up and down like tiny
broncos.
‘Practice,’ Chiron called after him. ‘You just need practice!’
‘Aaaaa!’ Grover went flying sideways down the hill like a possessed lawn
mower, heading towards the van.
Before I could follow, Chiron caught my arm. ‘I should have trained you
better, Percy,’ he said. ‘If only I had more time. Hercules, Jason – they all got
more training.’
‘That’s okay. I just wish –’
I stopped myself because I was about to sound like a brat. I was wishing my
dad had given me a cool magic item to help on the quest, something as good as
Luke’s flying shoes, or Annabeth’s invisible cap.
‘What am I thinking?’ Chiron cried. ‘I can’t let you get away without this.’
He pulled a pen from his coat pocket and handed it to me. It was an ordinary
disposable ballpoint, black ink, removable cap. Probably cost thirty cents.
‘Gee,’ I said. ‘Thanks.’
‘Percy, that’s a gift from your father. I’ve kept it for years, not knowing you
were who I was waiting for. But the prophecy is clear to me now. You are the
one.’
I remembered the field trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, when I’d
vaporized Mrs Dodds. Chiron had thrown me a pen that turned into a sword.
Could this be…?
I took off the cap, and the pen grew longer and heavier in my hand. In half a
second, I held a shimmering bronze sword with a double-edged blade, a leatherwrapped grip and a flat hilt riveted with gold studs. It was the first weapon that
actually felt balanced in my hand.
‘The sword has a long and tragic history that we need not go into,’ Chiron told
me. ‘Its name is Anaklusmos.’
‘“Riptide”,’ I translated, surprised the Ancient Greek came so easily.
‘Use it only for emergencies,’ Chiron said, ‘and only against monsters. No
hero should harm mortals unless absolutely necessary, of course, but this sword
wouldn’t harm them in any case.’
I looked at the wickedly sharp blade. ‘What do you mean it wouldn’t harm
mortals? How could it not?’
‘The sword is celestial bronze. Forged by the Cyclopes, tempered in the heart
of Mount Etna, cooled in the River Lethe. It’s deadly to monsters, to any
creature from the Underworld, provided they don’t kill you first. But the blade
will pass through mortals like an illusion. They simply are not important enough
for the blade to kill. And I should warn you: as a demigod, you can be killed by
either celestial or normal weapons. You are twice as vulnerable.’
‘Good to know.’
‘Now recap the pen.’
I touched the pen cap to the sword tip and instantly Riptide shrank to a
ballpoint pen again. I tucked it in my pocket, a little nervous, because I was
famous for losing pens at school.
‘You can’t,’ Chiron said.
‘Can’t what?’
‘Lose the pen,’ he said. ‘It is enchanted. It will always reappear in your
pocket. Try it.’
I was wary, but I threw the pen as far as I could down the hill and watched it
disappear in the grass.
‘It may take a few moments,’ Chiron told me. ‘Now check your pocket.’
Sure enough, the pen was there.
‘Okay, that’s extremely cool,’ I admitted. ‘But what if a mortal sees me pulling
out a sword?’
Chiron smiled. ‘Mist is a powerful thing, Percy.’
‘Mist?’
‘Yes. Read The Iliad. It’s full of references to the stuff. Whenever divine or
monstrous elements mix with the mortal world, they generate Mist, which
obscures the vision of humans. You will see things just as they are, being a halfblood, but humans will interpret things quite differently. Remarkable, really, the
lengths to which humans will go to fit things into their version of reality.’
I put Riptide back in my pocket.
For the first time, the quest felt real. I was actually leaving Half-Blood Hill. I
was heading west with no adult supervision, no backup plan, not even a cell
phone. (Chiron said cell phones were traceable by monsters; if we used one, it
would be worse than sending up a flare.) I had no weapon stronger than a sword
to fight off monsters and reach the Land of the Dead.
‘Chiron…’ I said. ‘When you say the gods are immortal… I mean, there was a
time before them, right?’
‘Four ages before them, actually. The Time of the Titans was the Fourth Age,
sometimes called the Golden Age, which is definitely a misnomer. This, the time
of Western civilization and the rule of Zeus, is the Fifth Age’.
‘So what was it like… before the gods?’
Chiron pursed his lips. ‘Even I am not old enough to remember that, child, but
I know it was a time of darkness and savagery for mortals. Kronos, the lord of
the Titans, called his reign the Golden Age because men lived innocent and free
of all knowledge. But that was mere propaganda. The Titan king cared nothing
for your kind except as appetizers or a source of cheap entertainment. It was
only in the early reign of Lord Zeus, when Prometheus the good Titan brought
fire to mankind, that your species began to progress, and even then Prometheus
was branded a radical thinker. Zeus punished him severely, as you may recall. Of
course, eventually the gods warmed to humans, and Western civilization was
born.’
‘But the gods can’t die now, right? I mean, as long as Western civilization is
alive, they’re alive. So… even if I failed, nothing could happen so bad it would
mess up everything, right?’
Chiron gave me a melancholy smile. ‘No one knows how long the Age of the
West will last, Percy. The gods are immortal, yes. But then, so were the Titans.
They still exist, locked away in their various prisons, forced to endure endless
pain and punishment, reduced in power, but still very much alive. May the Fates
forbid that the gods should ever suffer such a doom, or that we should ever
return to the darkness and chaos of the past. All we can do, child, is follow our
destiny.’
‘Our destiny… assuming we know what that is.’
‘Relax,’ Chiron told me. ‘Keep a clear head. And remember, you may be
about to prevent the biggest war in human history.’
‘Relax,’ I said. ‘I’m very relaxed.’
When I got to the bottom of the hill, I looked back. Under the pine tree that
used to be Thalia, daughter of Zeus, Chiron was now standing in full horse-man
form, holding his bow high in salute. Just your typical summer-camp send-off by
your typical centaur.
* * *
Argus drove us out of the countryside and into western Long Island. It felt weird
to be on a highway again, Annabeth and Grover sitting next to me as if we were
normal carpoolers. After two weeks at Half-Blood Hill, the real world seemed
like a fantasy. I found myself staring at every McDonald’s, every kid in the back
of his parents’ car, every billboard and shopping mall.
‘So far so good,’ I told Annabeth. ‘Ten miles and not a single monster.’
She gave me an irritated look. ‘It’s bad luck to talk that way, seaweed brain.’
‘Remind me again – why do you hate me so much?’
‘I don’t hate you.’
‘Could’ve fooled me.’
She folded her cap of invisibility. ‘Look… we’re j
‘I don’t hate you.’
‘Could’ve fooled me.’
She folded her cap of invisibility. ‘Look… we’re just not supposed to get
along, okay? Our parents are rivals.’
‘Why?’
She sighed. ‘How many reasons do you want? One time my mom caught
Poseidon with his girlfriend in Athena’s temple, which is hugely disrespectful.
Another time, Athena and Poseidon competed to be the patron god for the city of
Athens. Your dad created some stupid saltwater spring for his gift. My mom
created the olive tree. The people saw that her gift was better, so they named the
city after her.’
‘They must really like olives.’
‘Oh, forget it.’
‘Now, if she’d invented pizza – that I could understand.’
‘I said, forget it!’
In the front seat, Argus smiled. He didn’t say anything, but one blue eye on
the back of his neck winked at me.
Traffic slowed us down in Queens. By the time we got into Manhattan it was
sunset and starting to rain.
Argus dropped us at the Greyhound Station on the Upper East Side, not far
from my mom and Gabe’s apartment. Taped to a mailbox was a soggy flyer with
my picture on it: HAVE YOU SEEN THIS BOY?
I ripped it down before Annabeth and Grover could notice.
Argus unloaded our bags, made sure we got our bus tickets, then drove away,
the eye on the back of his hand opening to watch us as he pulled out of the
parking lot.
I thought about how close I was to my old apartment. On a normal day, my
mom would be home from the candy store by now. Smelly Gabe was probably
up there right now, playing poker, not even missing her.
Grover shouldered his backpack. He gazed down the street in the direction I
was looking. ‘You want to know why she married him, Percy?’
I stared at him. ‘Were you reading my mind or something?’
‘Just your emotions.’ He shrugged. ‘Guess I forgot to tell you satyrs can do
that. You were thinking about your mom and your stepdad, right?’
I nodded, wondering what else Grover might’ve forgotten to tell me.
‘Your mom married Gabe for you,’ Grover told me. ‘You call him “Smelly”,
but you’ve got no idea. The guy has this aura… Yuck. I can smell him from here.
I can smell traces of him on you, and you haven’t been near him for a fortnight.’
‘Thanks,’ I said. ‘Where’s the nearest shower?’
‘You should be grateful, Percy. Your stepfather smells so repulsively human
he could mask the presence of any demigod. As soon as I took a whiff inside his
Camaro, I knew: Gabe has been covering your scent for years. If you hadn’t
lived with him every summer, you probably would’ve been found by monsters a
long time ago. Your mom stayed with him to protect you. She was a smart lady.
She must’ve loved you a lot to put up with that guy – if that makes you feel any
better.’
It didn’t, but I forced myself not to show it. I’ll see her again, I thought. She
isn’t gone.
I wondered if Grover could still read my emotions, mixed up as they were. I
was glad he and Annabeth were with me, but I felt guilty that I hadn’t been
straight with them. I hadn’t told them the real reason I’d said yes to this crazy
quest.
The truth was, I didn’t care about retrieving Zeus’s lightning bolt, or saving
the world, or even helping my father out of trouble. The more I thought about it,
I resented Poseidon for never visiting me, never helping my mom, never even
sending a lousy child-support cheque. He’d only claimed me because he needed
a job done.
All I cared about was my mom. Hades had taken her unfairly, and Hades was
going to give her back.
You will be betrayed by one who calls you a friend, the Oracle whispered in
my mind. You will fail to save what matters most in the end.
Shut up, I told it.
The rain kept coming down.
We got restless waiting for the bus and decided to play some Hacky Sack with
one of Grover’s apples. Annabeth was unbelievable. She could bounce the apple
off her knee, her elbow, her shoulder, whatever. I wasn’t too bad myself.
The game ended when I tossed the apple towards Grover and it got too close
to his mouth. In one mega goat bite, our Hacky Sack disappeared – core, stem
and all.
Grover blushed. He tried to apologize, but Annabeth and I were too busy
cracking up.
Finally the bus came. As we stood in line to board, Grover started looking
around, sniffing the air like he smelled his favourite school cafeteria delicacy –
enchiladas.
‘What is it?’ I asked.
‘I don’t know,’ he said tensely. ‘Maybe it’s nothing.’
But I could tell it wasn’t nothing. I started looking over my shoulder, too.
I was relieved when we finally got on board and found seats together in the
back of the bus. We stowed our backpacks. Annabeth kept slapping her Yankees
cap nervously against her thigh.
As the last passengers got on, Annabeth clamped her hand onto my knee.
‘Percy.’
An old lady had just boarded the bus. She wore a crumpled velvet dress, lace
gloves and a shapeless orange-knit hat that shadowed her face, and she carried a
big paisley purse. When she tilted her head up, her black eyes glittered, and my
heart skipped a beat.
It was Mrs Dodds. Older, more withered, but definitely the same evil face.
I scrunched down in my seat.
Behind her came two more old ladies: one in a green hat, one in a purple hat.
Otherwise they looked exactly like Mrs Dodds – same gnarled hands, paisley
handbags, wrinkled velvet dresses. Triplet demon grandmothers.
They sat in the front row, right behind the driver. The two on the aisle crossed
their legs over the walkway, making an X. It was casual enough, but it sent a
clear message: nobody leaves.
The bus pulled out of the station, and we headed through the slick streets of
Manhattan. ‘She didn’t stay dead long,’ I said, trying to keep my voice from
quivering. ‘I thought you said they could be dispelled for a lifetime.’
‘I said if you’re lucky,’ Annabeth said. ‘You’re obviously not.’
‘All three of them,’ Grover whimpered. ‘Di immortales!’
‘It’s okay,’ Annabeth said, obviously thinking hard. ‘The Furies. The three
worst monsters from the Underworld. No problem. No problem. We’ll just slip
out the windows.’
‘They don’t open,’ Grover moaned.
‘A back exit?’she suggested.
There wasn’t one. Even if there had been, it wouldn’t have helped. By that
time, we were on Ninth Avenue, heading for the Lincoln Tunnel.
‘They won’t attack us with witnesses around,’ I said. ‘Will they?’
‘Mortals don’t have good eyes,’ Annabeth reminded me. ‘Their brains can
only process what they see through the Mist.’
‘They’ll see three old ladies killing us, won’t they?’
She thought about it. ‘Hard to say. But we can’t count on mortals for help.
Maybe an emergency exit in the roof…?’
We hit the Lincoln Tunnel, and the bus went dark except for the running lights
down the aisle. It was eerily quiet without the sound of the rain.
Mrs Dodds got up. In a flat voice, as if she’d rehearsed it, she announced to
the whole bus: ‘I need to use the restroom.’
‘So do I,’said the second sister.
‘So do I,’said the third sister.
They all started coming down the aisle.
‘I’ve got it,’ Annabeth said. ‘Percy, take my hat.’
‘What?’
‘You’re the one they want. Turn invisible and go up the aisle. Let them pass
you. Maybe you can get to the front and get away.’
‘But you guys –’
‘There’s an outside chance they might not notice us,’ Annabeth said. ‘You’re a
son of one of the Big Three. Your smell might be overpowering.’
‘I can’t just leave you.’
‘Don’t worry about us,’ Grover said. ‘Go!’
My hands trembled. I felt like a coward, but I took the Yankees cap and put it
on.
When I looked down, my body wasn’t there any more.
I started creeping up the aisle. I managed to get up ten rows, then duck into an
empty seat just as the Furies walked past.
Mrs Dodds stopped, sniffing, and looked straight at me. My heart was
pounding.
Apparently she didn’t see anything. She and her sisters kept going.
I was free. I made it to the front of the bus. We were almost through the
Lincoln Tunnel now. I was about to press the emergency stop button when I
heard hideous wailing from the back row.
The old ladies were not old ladies any more. Their faces were still the same –
I guess those couldn’t get any uglier – but their bodies had shrivelled into
leathery brown hag bodies with bat’s wings and hands and feet like gargoyle
claws. Their handbags had turned into fiery whips.
The Furies surrounded Grover and Annabeth, lashing their whips, hissing:
‘Where is it? Where?’
The other people on the bus were screaming, cowering in their seats. They
saw something, all right.
‘He’s not here!’ Annabeth yelled. ‘He’s gone!’
The Furies raised their whips.
Annabeth drew her bronze knife. Grover grabbed a tin can from his snack bag
and prepared to throw it.
What I did next was so impulsive and dangerous I should’ve been named
ADHD poster child of the year.
The bus driver was distracted, trying to see what was going on in his rearview
mirror.
Still invisible, I grabbed the wheel from him and jerked it to the left.
Everybody howled as they were thrown to the right, and I heard what I hoped
was the sound of three Furies smashing against the windows.
‘Hey!’ the driver yelled. ‘Hey – whoa!’
We wrestled for the wheel. The bus slammed against the side of the tunnel,
grinding metal, throwing sparks a mile behind us.
We careened out of the Lincoln Tunnel and back into the rainstorm, people
and monsters tossed around the bus, cars ploughed aside like bowling pins.
Somehow the driver found an exit. We shot off the highway, through half a
dozen traffic lights, and ended up barrelling down one of those New Jersey rural
roads where you can’t believe there’s so much nothing right across the river from
New York. There were woods to our left, the Hudson River to our right and the
driver seemed to be veering towards the river.
Another great idea: I hit the emergency brake.
The bus wailed, spun a full circle on the wet tar and crashed into the trees. The
emergency lights came on. The door flew open. The bus driver was the first one
out, the passengers yelling as they stampeded after him. I stepped into the
driver’s seat and let them pass.
The Furies regained their balance. They lashed their whips at Annabeth while
she waved her knife and yelled in Ancient Greek, telling them to back off.
Grover threw tin cans.
I looked at the open doorway. I was free to go, but I couldn’t leave my friends.
I took off the invisible cap. ‘Hey!’
The Furies turned, baring their yellow fangs at me, and the exit suddenly
sounded like an excellent idea. Mrs Dodds stalked up the aisle, just as she used
to do in class, about to deliver my F- maths test. Every time she flicked her
whip, red flames danced along the barbed leather.
Her two ugly sisters hopped on top of the seats on either side of her and
crawled towards me like huge nasty lizards.
‘Perseus Jackson,’ Mrs Dodds said, in an accent that was definitely from
somewhere further south than Georgia. ‘You have offended the gods. You shall
die.’
‘I liked you better as a maths teacher,’ I told her.
She growled.
Annabeth and Grover moved up behind the Furies cautiously, looking for an
opening.
I took the ballpoint pen out of my pocket and uncapped it. Riptide elongated
into a shimmering double-edged sword.
The Furies hesitated.
Mrs Dodds had felt Riptide’s blade before. She obviously didn’t like seeing it
again.
‘Submit now,’she hissed. ‘And you will not suffer eternal torment.’
‘Nice try,’ I told her.
‘Percy, look out!’ Annabeth cried.
Mrs Dodds lashed her whip around my sword hand while the Furies on the
either side lunged at me.
My hand felt like it was wrapped in molten lead, but I managed not to drop
Riptide. I struck the Fury on the left with its hilt, sending her toppling backwards
into a seat. I turned and sliced the Fury on the right. As soon as the blade
connected with her neck, she screamed and exploded into dust. Annabeth got
Mrs Dodds in a wrestler’s hold and yanked her backwards while Grover ripped
the whip out of her hands.
‘Ow!’ he yelled. ‘Ow! Hot! Hot!’
The Fury I’d hilt-slammed came at me again, talons ready, but I swung
Riptide and she broke open like a piñata.
Mrs Dodds was trying to get Annabeth off her back. She kicked, clawed,
hissed and bit, but Annabeth held on while Grover got Mrs Dodds’s legs tied up
in her own whip. Finally they both shoved her backwards into the aisle. Mrs
Dodds tried to get up, but she didn’t have room to flap her bat wings, so she kept
falling down.
‘Zeus will destroy you!’she promised. ‘Hades will have your soul!’
‘Braccas meas vescimini!’ I yelled.
I wasn’t sure where the Latin came from. I think it meant ‘Eat my pants!’
Thunder shook the bus. The hair rose on the back of my neck.
‘Get out!’ Annabeth yelled at me. ‘Now!’ I didn’t need any encouragement.
We rushed outside and found the other passengers wandering around in a
daze, arguing with the driver, or running around in circles yelling, ‘We’re going
to die!’ A Hawaiian-shirted tourist with a camera snapped my photograph before
I could recap my sword.
‘Our bags!’ Grover realized. ‘We left our –’
BOOOOOM!
The windows of the bus exploded as the passengers ran for cover. Lightning
shredded a huge crater in the roof, but an angry wail from inside told me Mrs
Dodds was not yet dead.
‘Run!’ Annabeth said. ‘She’s calling for reinforcements! We have to get out of
here!’
We plunged into the woods as the rain poured down, the bus in flames behind
us and nothing but darkness ahead.